DOC: Added tutorial about linear algebra on multidimensional arrays (#15295)
numpy/numpy: doc/source/user/tutorial-svd.rst

================================================
Tutorial: Linear algebra on n-dimensional arrays
================================================

.. currentmodule:: numpy

.. testsetup::

   import numpy as np
   np.random.seed(1)

**Prerequisites**

> Before reading this tutorial you should know a bit of Python. If you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before reading this tutorial, you should know a bit of Python. If you
```
Hi! I'm just making a few very small suggestions regarding language. Feel free to use or ignore them :)

Reviewer: By the way, this tutorial is awesome!! Very nice work!

would like to refresh your memory, take a look at the `Python
tutorial <https://docs.python.org/tutorial/>`__.

> If you wish to work the examples in this tutorial, you must also have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to be able to run the examples in this tutorial, you should also have
```
("Must" is correct, "should" is simply gentler.)

`matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org/>`_ and `SciPy <https://scipy.org>`_ installed on your computer.

**Learner profile**

> This tutorial is aimed at people who have some basic prior knowledge of linear

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial is for people who have a basic understanding of linear
```

algebra and arrays in NumPy and want to understand how n-dimensional
(:math:`n>=2`) arrays are represented and can be manipulated. In particular, if
you don't know how to apply common functions to n-dimensional arrays (without

> using for-loops), or if you wish to understand axis and shape properties for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using for-loops), or if you want to understand axis and shape properties for
```

n-dimensional arrays, this tutorial might be of help.

**Learning Objectives**

After this tutorial, you should be able to:

- Understand the difference between one-, two- and n-dimensional arrays in NumPy;
- Understand how to apply some linear algebra operations to n-dimensional arrays without using for-loops;
- Understand axis and shape properties for n-dimensional arrays.

**Content**

In this tutorial, we will use a `matrix decomposition <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_decomposition>`_ from linear algebra, the Singular Value Decomposition,  to
generate a compressed approximation of an image. We'll use the ``face`` image from the
`scipy.misc` module:

    >>> from scipy import misc
    >>> img = misc.face()

.. note::

   If you prefer, you can use your own image as you work through this tutorial. In
   order to transform your image into a NumPy array that can be manipulated, you can
   use the ``imread`` function from the `matplotlib.pyplot` submodule. Alternatively,
   you can use the ``imread`` function from the `imageio library

>    <https://imageio.readthedocs.io/en/stable/userapi.html#imageio.imread>`_. Be aware

Reviewer 2: It would be neat to use `intersphinx` here

Author: I haven't done this yet, but I'll try looking into it, thanks.

Reviewer 3: I think this would mean (approximately, I didn't test it):
- adding https://imageio.readthedocs.io/en/stable to the intersphinx section of the `conf.py`
- changing the link to
  ```
  `imread <imageio.imread>`
  or
  `imageio.imread`
  ```

Reviewer 2: Or `~imageio.imread` I think too?

Author: That worked, thanks!

    information on how images are treated when converted to NumPy arrays, see `A crash course on NumPy
    for images <https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/user_guide/numpy_images.html>`_ from the

>     ``scikit-image`` documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer, you can use your own image as you work through this tutorial. In order to transform your image into a NumPy array that can be manipulated, you can use the ``imread`` function from the matplotlib.pyplot submodule. Alternatively, you can use the ``imread`` function from the `imageio library <https://imageio.readthedocs.io/en/stable/userapi.html#imageio.imread>`_. Be aware that if you use your own image, you'll likely need to adapt the steps below.

For more information on how images are treated when converted to NumPy arrays, see `A crash course on NumPy for images <https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/user_guide/numpy_images.html>`_ from the ``scikit-image`` documentation.
```

**Shape, axis and array properties**

Note that, in linear algebra, the dimension of a vector refers to the number of entries in an array. In NumPy, it instead defines the number of axes. For example, a 1D array is a vector such as ``[1, 2, 3]``, a 2D array is a matrix, and so forth.

First, let's check for the shape of the data in our array. Since this image is
two-dimensional (the pixels in the image form a rectangle), we might expect a
two-dimensional array to represent it (a matrix). However, using the ``shape``
property of this NumPy array gives us a different result::

    >>> img.shape
    (768, 1024, 3)

The output is a `tuple` with three elements, which means that this is a
three-dimensional array. In fact, since this is a color image, and we have used
the ``imread`` function to read it, the data is organized in three 2D arrays,
representing color channels (in this case, red, green and blue - RGB). You can
see this by looking at the shape above: it indicates that we have an array of 3
matrices, each having shape 768x1024.

Furthermore, using the ``ndim`` property of this array, we can see that

::

    >>> img.ndim
    3

> Each dimension is also referred to as an `axis` on NumPy. Because of how ``imread``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NumPy refers to each dimension as an `axis`. Because of how ``imread``
```

works, the *first index in the 3rd axis* is the red pixel data for our image. We
can access this by using the syntax

::

    >>> img[:, :, 0]
    array([[121, 138, 153, ..., 119, 131, 139],
           [ 89, 110, 130, ..., 118, 134, 146],
           [ 73,  94, 115, ..., 117, 133, 144],
           ...,
           [ 87,  94, 107, ..., 120, 119, 119],
           [ 85,  95, 112, ..., 121, 120, 120],
           [ 85,  97, 111, ..., 120, 119, 118]], dtype=uint8)

From the output above, we can see that every value in ``img[:,:,0]`` is an
integer value between 0 and 255, representing the level of red in each
corresponding image pixel (keep in mind that this might be different if you
use your own image instead of `scipy.misc.face`).

As expected, this is a 768x1024 matrix::

    >>> img[:, :, 0].shape
    (768, 1024)

Since we are going to perform linear algebra operations on this data, it might
be more interesting to have real numbers between 0 and 1 in each entry of the
matrices to represent the RGB values. We can do that by setting

    >>> img_array = img/255

This operation, dividing an array by a scalar, works because of NumPy's `broadcasting

> <https://numpy.org/devdocs/user/basics.broadcasting.html>`_. You can check this by

Reviewer 2: Another link that should be relative.

.. note::

    NumPy has a linear algebra module, `numpy.linalg`, that can be used to
    perform the operations in this tutorial. However, the same functions can
    also be found in `scipy.linalg`. For more information on this, and why we
    choose to use the `scipy.linalg` module, check the `scipy.linalg Reference
    <https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/tutorial/linalg.html>`_.

To proceed, import the linear algebra submodule from either NumPy or SciPy::

    >>> from scipy import linalg

To simplify, let's assign each color channel to a separate matrix::

    >>> red_array = img_array[:, :, 0]
    >>> green_array = img_array[:, :, 1]
    >>> blue_array = img_array[:, :, 2]

In order to extract information from each matrix, we can use the SVD to obtain
3 arrays which can be multiplied to obtain the original matrix. From the theory of
linear algebra, given a matrix :math:`A`, the following product can be computed:

.. math::

   U \Sigma V^T = A

where :math:`U` and :math:`V^T` are square and :math:`\Sigma` is the same size
as :math:`A`. :math:`\Sigma` is a diagonal matrix and contains the
`singular values` of :math:`A`, organized from largest to smallest. These values

> are always non-negative, and can be used as an indicator of the "importance" of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are always non-negative and can be used as an indicator of the "importance" of
```

some features represented by the matrix :math:`A`.

Let's see how this works in practice with ``blue_array`` as the matrix to be
decomposed:

::

    >>> U_blue, s_blue, Vt_blue = linalg.svd(blue_array)

.. note::

    If you are using your own image, this command might take a while to run,
    depending on the size of your image and your hardware; don't worry, as this

>     is expected! The SVD can be a pretty intensive computation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
depending on the size of your image and your hardware. Don't worry, this
    is normal! The SVD can be a pretty intensive computation.

   
Let's check that this is what we expected::

    >>> U_blue.shape, s_blue.shape, Vt_blue.shape
    ((768, 768), (768,), (1024, 1024))

Note that ``s_blue`` has a particular shape: it has only one dimension. This
means that some linear algebra functions that expect 2d arrays might not work.

> For example, from the theory one might expect ``s_blue`` and ``Vt_blue`` to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, from the theory, one might expect ``s_blue`` and ``Vt_blue`` to be
```

compatible for multiplication. However, this is not true as ``s_blue`` does not
have a second axis. Executing

::

    >>> s_blue @ Vt_blue

results in a ``ValueError`` (note that the ``@`` operator performs matrix
multiplication on NumPy arrays). This happens because having a one-dimensional

> array for ``s``, in this case, is much more economic in practice than building a

Reviewer: economical?

Author: Oops, yes :)

diagonal matrix with the same data. To reconstruct the original matrix, we can
rebuild the diagonal matrix :math:`\Sigma` with the elements of ``s_blue`` in
its diagonal and with the appropriate dimensions for multiplying: in our case,
:math:`\Sigma` should be 768x1024 since ``U`` is 768x768 and ``Vt`` is 1024x1024.

::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> Sigma_blue = np.zeros((768, 1024))
    >>> for i in range(768):
    ...     Sigma_blue[i,i] = s_blue[i]

Now, we want to check if the reconstructed ``U_blue @ Sigma_blue @ Vt_blue`` is
close to the original ``blue_array`` matrix.

**Approximation**

The `linalg` module includes a ``norm`` function, which
computes the norm of a vector or matrix represented in a NumPy array. For
example, from the SVD explanation above, we would expect the norm of the
difference between ``blue_array`` and the reconstructed SVD product to be small.
As expected, you should see something like

::

    >>> linalg.norm(blue_array - U_blue @ Sigma_blue @ Vt_blue)
    9.183739693484683e-13

(keep in mind that the actual result of this operation might be different
depending on your architecture and linear algebra setup; however, you should

> see a small number.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(The actual result of this operation might be different depending on your architecture and linear algebra setup. Regardless, you should see a small number.)

We could also have used the `numpy.allclose` function to make sure the

> reconstructed product is, in fact, *close* to our original matrix (that is, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reconstructed product is, in fact, *close* to our original matrix (the
```

difference between the two arrays is small)::

    >>> np.allclose(blue_array, U_blue @ Sigma_blue @ Vt_blue)
    True

To see if an approximation is reasonable, we can check the values in ``s_blue``::

    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    >>> plt.plot(s_blue)

In the graph, we can see that although we have 768 singular values in
``s_blue``, most of those (after the 150th entry or so) are pretty small. So it
might make sense to use only the information related to the first (say, 50)
*singular values* to build a more economic approximation to our image.

The idea is to consider all but the first ``k`` singular values in
``Sigma_blue`` (which are the same as in ``s_blue``) as zeros, keeping
``U_blue`` and ``Vt_blue`` intact, and computing the product of these matrices
as the approximation.

For example, if we choose 

::

    >>> k = 10

we can build the approximation by doing

::

    >>> approx_blue = U_blue @ Sigma_blue[:, :k] @ Vt_blue[:k,:]

Note that we had to use only the first ``k`` rows of ``Vt_blue``, since all
other rows would be multiplied by the zeros corresponding to the singular
values we eliminated from this approximation.

> To see if this approximation makes sense in our image, we must use a colormap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see if this approximation makes sense in our image, we should use a colormap
```

from `matplotlib` corresponding to the color we wish to see in each
individual image (otherwise, `matplotlib` will default to a colormap that does
not correspond to the real data).

In our case, we are approximating the blue portion of the image, so we will use
the colormap ``Blues``::

    >>> plt.imshow(approx_blue, cmap=plt.cm.Blues)

Now, you can go ahead and repeat this experiment with other values of `k`, and

> each of those should give you a slightly better (or worse) image depending on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
each of your experiments should give you a slightly better (or worse) image depending on
```

the value you choose.

> Just for good measure, to see how the original blue array looks like, you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just for good measure, to see what the original blue array looks like, you can
```

> do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use
```

::

    >>> plt.imshow(blue_array, cmap=plt.cm.Blues)

**Applying to all colors**

> Now, we want to do the same kind of operation, but to all three colors. Our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we want to do the same kind of operation, but to all three colors. Our
```

Now we want to do the same kind of operation, but to all three colors. Our
first instinct might be to repeat the same operation we did above to each color

> matrix individually. However, NumPy's `broadcasting <https://numpy.org/devdocs/user/basics.broadcasting.html>`_ takes care of this

Reviewer 2: We should make this a relative link

If our array has more than two dimensions, then the SVD can be applied to all
axes at once. However, the linear algebra functions in NumPy expect to see an
array of the form ``(N, M, M)``, where the first axis represents the number
of matrices.

In our case,

::

    >>> img_array.shape
    (768, 1024, 3)

> so we need to permutate the axis on this array to make get a shape like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so we need to permutate the axis on this array to get a shape like
```

``(3, 768, 1024)``. Fortunately, the `numpy.transpose` function can do that for
us:

``np.transpose(x, axes=(i, j, k))`` 

indicates that the axis will be reordered such that the final shape of the
transposed array will be reordered according to the indices ``(i, j, k)``.

Let's see how this goes for our array::

    >>> img_array_transposed = np.transpose(img_array, (2, 0, 1))
    >>> img_array.shape
    (3, 768, 1024)

Now we are ready to apply the SVD::

    >>> U, s, Vt = linalg.svd(img_array_transposed)

Finally, to obtain the full approximated image, we need to reassemble these
matrices into the approximation. Now, note that

::

    >>> U.shape, s.shape, Vt.shape
    ((3, 768, 768), (3, 768), (3, 1024, 1024))

To build the final approximation matrix, we must understand how multiplication
across different axes works.

**Products with n-dimensional arrays**

If you have worked before with only one- or two-dimensional arrays in NumPy,
you might use `numpy.dot` and `numpy.matmul` (or the ``@`` operator)
interchangeably. However, for n-dimensional arrays, they work in very different
ways. For more details, check the documentation `numpy.matmul`.

> Now, to build our approximation, we need first to make sure that our singular

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, to build our approximation, we first need to make sure that our singular
```

values are ready for multiplication, so we build our ``Sigma`` matrix similarly
to what we did before. The ``Sigma`` array must have dimensions
``(3, 768, 1024)``.

::

    >>> Sigma = np.zeros((3, 768, 1024))
    >>> for j in range(3):
    ...     for i in range(768):
    ...         Sigma[j, i, i] = s[j, i]

Now, if we wish to rebuild the full SVD (with no approximation), we could do

::

    >>> reconstructed = U @ Sigma @ Vt

Note that

::

    >>> reconstructed.shape
    (3, 768, 1024)

and

::

    >>> plt.imshow(np.transpose(reconstructed, (1, 2, 0)))

should give you an image indistinguishable from the original one (although we

> do possibly introduce floating point errors for this reconstruction; in fact, it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
may introduce floating point errors for this reconstruction. In fact, 
```

> is possible that you see a warning message saying "Clipping input data to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you might see a warning message saying "Clipping input data to the
```

valid range for imshow with RGB data ([0..1] for floats or [0..255] for
integers)." This is expected from the manipulation we just did on the original
image.

Now, to do the approximation, we must choose only the first ``k`` singular

> values for each color channel. This can be done by the following syntax::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values for each color channel. This can be done using the following syntax::
```

    >>> approx_img = U @ Sigma[..., :k] @ Vt[..., :k, :]

You can see that we have selected only the first ``k`` components of the last
axis for ``Sigma`` (this means that we have used only the first ``k`` columns
of each of the three matrices in the stack), and that we have selected only the
first ``k`` components in the second-to-last axis of ``Vt`` (this means we have
selected, from every matrix in the stack ``Vt``, the first ``k`` rows only, and

> all columns). If you are unfamiliar with the ellipsis syntax, it is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
first ``k`` components in the second-to-last axis of ``Vt`` (this means we have
selected only the first ``k`` rows from every matrix in the stack ``Vt`` and
all columns). If you are unfamiliar with the ellipsis syntax, it is a

> placeholder for other axes; for more details, see the documentation on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
placeholder for other axes. For more details, see the documentation on
```

:ref:`Indexing <basics.indexing>`.

Now,

::

    >>> approx_img.shape
    (3, 768, 1024)

> which is not the right shape for showing the image. So, finally, reordering the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is not the right shape for showing the image. Finally, reordering the
```

axes back to our original shape of (768, 1024, 3), we can see our approximation::

    >>> plt.imshow(np.transpose(approx_img, (1, 2, 0)))

Even though the image is not as sharp, using a small number of ``k`` singular

> values (compared to the original set of 768 values) we can recover many of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values (compared to the original set of 768 values), we can recover many of the
```

distinguishing features from this image.

**Final words**

Of course, this is not the best method to *approximate* an image.

> However, there is in fact a result in linear algebra that says that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there is, in fact, a result in linear algebra that says that the
```

================================================
Tutorial: Linear algebra on n-dimensional arrays
================================================

.. currentmodule:: numpy

.. testsetup::

   import numpy as np
   np.random.seed(1)

Prerequisites

> =============

Reviewer 4: minor: these headings will end up in ToC's and generate links. should it be changed to just bold font to avoid that?

Before reading this tutorial you should know a bit of Python. If you
would like to refresh your memory, take a look at the `Python
tutorial <https://docs.python.org/tutorial/>`__.

If you wish to work the examples in this tutorial, you must also have

> some software installed on your computer. Please see

Reviewer 4: "some software" is a bit too general, we can spell it out (numpy, scipy, matplotlib).

I was a little on the fence about this, because we've always assumed such things. But on reflection I think this is quite nice; every tutorial can then really be standalone.

https://scipy.org/install.html for instructions.

Learner profile
===============

This tutorial is aimed at people who have some basic prior knowledge of linear
algebra and arrays in NumPy and want to understand how n-dimensional
(:math:`n>=2`) arrays are represented and can be manipulated. In particular, if
you don't know how to apply common functions to n-dimensional arrays in stacked
format (without using for-loops), or if you wish to understand axis and shape
properties for n-dimensional arrays, this tutorial might be of help.

Learning Objectives
===================

After this tutorial, you should be able to:

- Understand the difference between one-, two- and n-dimensional arrays in NumPy;
- Understand how to apply some linear algebra operations in stacked format;
- Understand axis and shape properties for n-dimensional arrays.

Content
=======

In this tutorial, we will use linear algebra to generate an approximation of an
image. We'll use the ``face`` image from the `scipy.misc` module:

    >>> from scipy import misc

>     >>> img = misc.face()

Reviewer 4: Just a note for other reviewers: please leave this as is for now, we'll deal with where to get the image from later.

Reviewer 4: okay this will depend on the datasets package we want to depend on later. for now let's just depend on SciPy in the docs for getting a hold of the image (we already have that dependency in the CircleCI doc buid job anyway).

If you would rather use your own image, in order to transform this image into a
numpy array that can be manipulated, we will use the ``imread`` function from the

> `matplotlib.image` submodule.

Reviewer 4: `matplotlib.image` -> `matplotlib.pyplot`

Reviewer 2: I wonder whether we should plug `imageio.imread` here instead

Author: I'll add a mention to it, since it's optional it doesn't have to be a dependency I guess.

Now, ``img`` is a numpy array, as we can see when using the ``type`` function:

::

    >>> type(img)
    numpy.ndarray

We can see the image using the `matplotlib.pyplot.imshow` function:

    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    >>> plt.imshow(img)

> .. image:: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/_images/scipy-misc-face-1.png

Reviewer 4: You want to use `.. plot::` above the two lines of code so the output gets rendered here when docs get built.

Author: This doesn't work since the code is mixed with text. At this point `img` has been defined at another code block so I get an error when building the docs. Would it be better to use a separate script for each image and use something like `.. plot:: gallery/plot_face.py`? Note that I didn't include images for the next steps exactly for the same reason.

Reviewer 4: yes indeed, script file would be good. there's examples of that in `doc/source/user/plots/`

Shape, axis and array properties
--------------------------------

One particular important observation to be made is that, if you are at all
familiar with linear algebra, you might expect `dimensions` to refer to the
number of coordinates in each axis of your coordinate system; thus, a
two-dimensional vector would be a list of two coordinates. In NumPy, however,

> a `dimension` is one of the axes in the array, so a two-dimensional vector

Reviewer 4: "two-dimensional vector" ---> "two-dimensional array", right?

Author: I added your idea, Stefan. Thanks!

is the equivalent of a matrix.

First, let's check for the shape of the data in our array. Since this image is
a two-dimensional set of data (the pixels in the image form a rectangle), we
might expect a two-dimensional array to represent it (a matrix). However, using
the ``shape`` property of this NumPy array gives us a different result:

> ::

Reviewer 2: Nit: You can combine these three lines into one if you replace `result:` with `result::`.

    >>> img.shape
    (768, 1024, 3)

The output is a tuple, with three elements, which means that this is a
three-dimensional array. In fact, since this is a color image, we have one set
of pixel data per color (in this case, red, green and blue - RGB). You can see
this by looking at the shape above: it indicates that we have 3 sets of 768x1024

> matrices.

Reviewer 4: perhaps instead of "we have" use something like "can be interpreted as". because it might give the wrong indication otherwise that there's something special about the third dimension of an array

Furthermore, using the ``ndim`` property of this array, we can see that

::

    >>> img.ndim
    3

> Each dimension is also referred to as an `axis` on NumPy. Because of how \

Reviewer 4: stray `\`

color images work, the *first index in the 3rd axis* is the red pixel data for
our image. We can access this by using the syntax

::

    >>> img[:, :, 0]
    array([[121, 138, 153, ..., 119, 131, 139],
           [ 89, 110, 130, ..., 118, 134, 146],
           [ 73,  94, 115, ..., 117, 133, 144],
           ...,
           [ 87,  94, 107, ..., 120, 119, 119],
           [ 85,  95, 112, ..., 121, 120, 120],
           [ 85,  97, 111, ..., 120, 119, 118]], dtype=uint8)

From the output above, we can see that every value in ``img[:,:,0]`` is an
integer value between 0 and 255, representing the level of red in each
corresponding image pixel.

As expected, this is a 768x1024 matrix:

> ::

Reviewer 4: minor: you don't need to have `::` on a separate line. you can instead use `... is a 768x1024 matrix::` above

    >>> img[:, :, 0].shape
    (768, 1024)

Since we are going to perform linear algebra on this data, it might be more
interesting to have real numbers between 0 and 1 in each entry of the matrices
to represent the RGB values. We can do that by setting

>     >>> img_array = img/255

Reviewer 4: This works, but relies on knowing about the input scale. Perhaps it's worth pointing out that one should use, e.g., https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.util.html#skimage.util.img_as_float. Not sure though if it complicates things too much here. @stefanv?

Author: I have reformulated this a bit to try and make it a little more explicit that it's a special case. The idea here is to actually show that you can do that kind of operation - divide an entire array by a scalar - and broadcasting will make it work. I'm aware that it's not ideal in the real world. Let me know what you think

Reviewer 4: this is nicer, but would still be useful I think to add a small note somewhere about scikit-image having a utility function for this. then we can call it good imho

Author: Let me know if this is better!

You can check if this worked by doing some tests; for example, inquiring about
maximum and minimum values for this array:

::

    >>> img_array.max(), img_array.min()
    (1.0, 0.0)

or checking the type of data in the array:

::

    >>> img_array.dtype
    dtype('float64')

Linear algebra on an axis
-------------------------

It is possible to use methods from linear algebra to approximate an existing set
of data. Here, we will use the SVD (Singular Value Decomposition) to try to
extract the most important information from this image.

Keep in mind that most linear algebra operations (functions in the
`numpy.linalg` module) can also be found in `scipy.linalg`. For more information

> on this, check the `numpy.linalg` reference.

Reviewer 4: should this be a `.. note::`?

> on this, check the `numpy.linalg` reference.

Author: This is something we are planning on writing - a more in-depth explanation of why this is so. I'll just link to the [Scipy linalg Reference Guide](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/tutorial/linalg.html) for now, if that's ok.

To proceed, import the linear algebra submodule from either NumPy or SciPy:

>     >>> import numpy.linalg as LA

Reviewer 4: let's not do this, that's non-PEP 8 compliant old style. I know we may have this in other places still; we should nuke that.

`from scipy import linalg` is right for SciPy; for NumPy it could be simply `np.linalg.*` or `from numpy import linalg`. So the latter style would be better, so numpy/scipy are interchangeable.

Reviewer 2: Agreed that we shouldn't do this, but I wasn't aware this went against PEP8 - can you point to the part it concerns?

To simplify, let's assign each color channel to a separate matrix:

::

    >>> red_array = img_array[:,:,0]
    >>> green_array = img_array[:,:,1]

>     >>> blue_array = img_array[:,:,2]

Reviewer 2: Do we want to encourage PEP8 here?
```suggestion
    >>> blue_array = img_array[:, :, 2]
```

In order to extract information from each matrix, we can use the SVD to obtain
3 arrays representing a decomposition. From the theory of linear algebra, given
a matrix :math:`A`, the following decomposition can be computed:

.. math::

   U \Sigma V^T = A

where :math:`U` and :math:`V^T` are square and :math:`\Sigma` is the same size
as :math:`A` (so that the multiplication between :math:`U`, :math:`\Sigma` and
:math:`V^T` works). :math:`\Sigma` is a diagonal matrix and contains the
`singular values` of :math:`A`, organized from highest to smallest. These values
are always non-negative, and can be used as an indicator of the "importance" of
some features represented by this data matrix.

Let's see how this works in practice with ``blue_array``.

::

>     >>> U_blue, s_blue, Vt_blue = LA.svd(blue_array)

Reviewer 2: I wonder whether it would be more instructive to pass
```suggestion
    >>> U_blue, s_blue, Vt_blue = LA.svd(blue_array, full_matrices=False)
```

Author: I just wanted to keep it simple and not add more arguments to the function (since this is not necessarily the focus here, I won't be explaining the details of the SVD function), but if you think it would be more explicit I'll add it.

Reviewer 2: Doing it this way makes creating the S matrix later a little simpler, as it then is a square diagonal matrix. Let's see what others think.

.. note::

>     This command might take a while to run, depending on your hardware; don't

Reviewer 4: perhaps "a couple of seconds"? It takes ~200 ms on a decent CPU, so not 100% sure this warning is necessary

    worry, as this is expected! The SVD is a pretty intensive computation.

Let's check that this is what we expected:

::

    >>> U_blue.shape, s_blue.shape, Vt_blue.shape
    ((768, 768), (768,), (1024, 1024))

Note that ``s_blue`` has a particular shape: it has only one dimension. This
means that some functions might work differently than expected for this array.
For example, from the theory one might expect ``s_blue`` and ``Vt_blue`` to be
compatible for multiplication. However, this is not true as ``s_blue`` does not
have a second axis. Executing

::

>     >>> s_blue @ Vt_blue

Reviewer 4: worth noting that `@` is matrix multiplication, I think it's the first usage here

results in a ``ValueError``. This happens because having a one-dimensional array
for ``s``, in this case, is much more economic in practice than building a
diagonal matrix with the same data. To reconstruct the original matrix, we can
rebuild the diagonal matrix :math:`\Sigma` with the elements of ``s_blue`` in
its diagonal and with the appropriate dimensions for multiplying: in our case,

> ``Sigma`` should be 768x1024 since ``U`` is 768x768 and ``Vt`` is 1024x1024.

Reviewer 4: forgot `:math:` for `Sigma` here?

::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> Sigma_blue = np.zeros((768, 1024))
    >>> for i in range(768):
    ...     Sigma_blue[i,i] = s_blue[i]

Now, we want to check if the reconstructed ``U_blue @ Sigma_blue @ Vt_blue`` is

> close to the original ``blue_array`` matrix.

Reviewer 4: +1

> close to the original ``blue_array`` matrix.

Author: Is this better? I like the way it turned out, thanks for the suggestion!

``s_blue``, most of those (after the 150th entry or so) are pretty small. So it
might make sense to use only the information related to the first (say, 50)
*singular values* to build a more economic approximation to our image.

The idea is to consider all but the first ``k`` singular values in
``Sigma_blue`` (which are the same as in ``s_blue``) as zeros, keeping
``U_blue`` and ``Vt_blue`` intact, and computing the product of these matrices
as the approximation.

For example, if we choose 

::

    >>> k = 10

we can build the approximation by doing

::

    >>> approx_blue = U_blue @ Sigma_blue[:, :k] @ Vt_blue[:k,:]

Note that we had to use only the first ``k`` rows of ``Vt_blue``, since all
other rows would be multiplied by the zeros corresponding to the singular
values we eliminated from this approximation.

To see if this approximation makes sense in our image, we must use a colormap
from `matplotlib` corresponding to the color we wish to see in each
individual image (otherwise, `matplotlib` will default to a colormap that does
not correspond to the real data).

In our case, we are approximating the blue portion of the image, so we will use
the colormap ``Blues``:

> ::

Reviewer 4: also would be good to use `.. plot::` here so the image gets rendered I think

Reviewer 4: and same further down

    >>> plt.imshow(approx_blue, cmap=plt.cm.Blues)

Now, you can go ahead and repeat this experiment with other values of `k`, and
each of those should give you a slightly better (or worse) image depending on
the value you choose.

Just for good measure, to see how the original blue array looks like, you can
do

::

    >>> plt.imshow(blue_array, cmap=plt.cm.Blues)

Applying to all colors
----------------------

Now, we want to do the same kind of operation, but to all three colors. Our
first instinct might be to repeat the same operation we did above to each color

> matrix individually. However, numpy's `broadcasting` takes care of this

Reviewer 4: I think this linking to `broadcasting` doesn't work, should need a `:ref:`

for us.

If our array has more than two dimensions, then the SVD can be applied in
“stacked” mode. However, the linear algebra functions in numpy expect to see a
stacking of the form ``(N, M, M)``, where the first axis represents the number
of stacked matrices (i.e. ``(N, M, M)`` is interpreted as a “stack” of ``N``
matrices, each of size ``(M, M)``.)

In our case,

::

    >>> img_array.shape
    (768, 1024, 3)

so we need to permutate the axis on this array to make get a shape like
``(3, 768, 1024)``. Fortunately, the `numpy.transpose` function can do that for
us:

> ``np.transpose(x, axes=(i, j, k))`` 

Reviewer 2: Should this be a code block?

Also, do we want to show `np.moveaxis(x, -1, 0)` here instead?

Reviewer 4: +1 for changing to a code block. no need for `moveaxis` I think, that's a personal preference thing

Let's see how this goes for our array:

::

    >>> img_array_transposed = np.transpose(img_array, (2, 0, 1))
    >>> img_array.shape
    (3, 768, 1024)

Now we are ready to apply the SVD:

::

    >>> U, s, Vt = LA.svd(img_array_transposed)

Finally, to obtain the full approximated image, we need to reassemble these
matrices into the approximation. Now, note that

::

    >>> U.shape, s.shape, Vt.shape
    ((3, 768, 768), (3, 768), (3, 1024, 1024))

To build the final approximation matrix, we must understand how multiplication
across different axes works.

Products with n-dimensional arrays
----------------------------------

If you have worked before with only one- or two-dimensional arrays in NumPy,
you might use `numpy.dot` and `numpy.matmul` (or the ``@`` operator)
interchangeably. However, for n-dimensional arrays, they work in very different
ways. For more details, check the documentation `numpy.matmul`.

Now, to build our approximation, we need first to make sure that our singular
values are ready for multiplication, so we build our ``Sigma`` matrix similarly
to what we did before. The ``Sigma`` array must have dimensions
``(3, 768, 1024)``.

::

>     >>> Sigma = np.zeros((3, 768, 1024))

Reviewer 5: This does not seem like the correct way to generate this array.

But, also, it does not seem desirable to make such a large Sigma.  Is that necessary?  Can't broadcasting do some of the work here?

At this point, I feel like we may be overwhelming the audience a bit.  While it is true that with broadcasting and other tricks you can turn everything into a near one-liner, something like `apply_along_axis` would probably be about as effective and less confusing to beginners.

Maybe stop the tutorial before the color section?

Reviewer 2: If we did my suggestion in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/15295#discussion_r364660316, then this would become something like:

```
Sigma = np.apply_along_axis(np.diag, s, -1)
```
Things get awkward because the singular value matrix is rectangular, which isn't useful for compression anyway.

Author: I felt that adding `np.apply_along_axis` would be more complicated to explain. I was trying to keep concepts as close to linear algebra as possible, and while the transpose is a well known operation to most people who use linear algebra in their research/work, `apply_along_axis` might be a little more tricky to explain. 

About the length of the tutorial, I could break this tutorial into 2 shorter ones; one about the more basic operations and broadcasting - done only on a gray scale imge - and another one about multiple axes. However, i felt that the Absolute Beginner's tutorial will work with the basic operations so I wanted to take this one a little farther. 

Let me know if you think it would be better to break this one, and I can reformulate it. Thanks!

Reviewer 4: I agree with keeping things simple here. `zeros` is trivial to understand, `apply_along_axis(...)` isn't.

And also +1 on keeping scope as is, it doesn't really make sense to split in two since then the non-linalg stuff is covered by other parts of the docs already. The alternative that could be considered is shortening, but the current length doesn't bother me.

Reviewer 5: The simplicity argument is a strong one.  At the same time, I think it is important that we teach the mechanisms we would use ourselves.  Habits are surprisingly hard to un-teach!  You'll almost never see double for loops in practice and besides that you most often do not need large arrays to represent repeating elements (given tools such as broadcasting, etc.). But, let's see how it all comes together; I'm happy to do another round of review after a round of editing.

Reviewer 4: Ah, I was just commenting on the `np.zeros` usage. Agree that the double for-loop below is undesired.

Author: I tried using `np.fill_diagonal` to make this better, let me know what you all think.

Reviewer 4: looks good to me now

::

    >>> approx_img = U @ Sigma[..., :k] @ Vt[..., :k, :]

You can see that we have selected only the first ``k`` components of the last
axis for ``Sigma`` (this means that we have used only the first ``k`` columns
of each of the three matrices in the stack), and that we have selected only the
first ``k`` components in the second-to-last axis of ``Vt`` (this means we have
selected, from every matrix in the stack ``Vt``, the first ``k`` rows only, and
all columns). If you are unfamiliar with the ellipsis syntax, it is a
placeholder for other axes; for more details, see the documentation on
:ref:`Indexing <basics.indexing>`.

Now,

::

    >>> approx_img.shape
    (3, 768, 1024)

which is not the right shape for showing the image. So, finally, reordering the
axes back to our original shape of (768, 1024, 3), we can see our approximation:

::

    >>> plt.imshow(np.transpose(approx_img, (1, 2, 0)))

Even though the image is not as sharp, using a small number of ``k`` singular
values (compared to the original set of 768 values) we can recover many of the
distinguishing features from this image.

Final words
-----------

> Of course, this is not the best method to *approximate* or *compress* an image.

Reviewer 4: You haven't used "compress" in the rest of this tutorial. So maybe either leave out here or explain how the SVD outputs give the opportunity for better compression?

================================================
Tutorial: Linear algebra on n-dimensional arrays
================================================

.. currentmodule:: numpy

.. testsetup::

   import numpy as np
   np.random.seed(1)

**Prerequisites**

Before reading this tutorial, you should know a bit of Python. If you
would like to refresh your memory, take a look at the `Python

> tutorial <https://docs.python.org/tutorial/>`__.

Reviewer 3: Could be changed to `tutorial-index`, although that is a bit generic, it is the official intersphinx link to the page. Maybe too generic to be useful: if we ever create a `tutorial-index` heading I don't know what would take precedence

Author: I used the suggestion from above and changed it to `<python:tutorial/index>`

           [ 73,  94, 115, ..., 117, 133, 144],
           ...,
           [ 87,  94, 107, ..., 120, 119, 119],
           [ 85,  95, 112, ..., 121, 120, 120],
           [ 85,  97, 111, ..., 120, 119, 118]], dtype=uint8)

From the output above, we can see that every value in ``img[:,:,0]`` is an
integer value between 0 and 255, representing the level of red in each
corresponding image pixel (keep in mind that this might be different if you
use your own image instead of `scipy.misc.face`).

As expected, this is a 768x1024 matrix::

    >>> img[:, :, 0].shape
    (768, 1024)

Since we are going to perform linear algebra operations on this data, it might
be more interesting to have real numbers between 0 and 1 in each entry of the
matrices to represent the RGB values. We can do that by setting

    >>> img_array = img / 255

This operation, dividing an array by a scalar, works because of NumPy's `broadcasting`
rules (see :ref:`array-broadcasting-in-numpy`). (Note that in real-world
applications, it would be better to use, for example, the `img_as_float
<https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.util.html#skimage.util.img_as_float>`_

> utility function from ``scikit-image``).

Reviewer 3: Also could be an intersphinx link if we add https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev, the link would be `skimage.img_as_float`

or checking the type of data in the array::

    >>> img_array.dtype
    dtype('float64')

Note that we can assign each color channel to a separate matrix using the slice syntax::

    >>> red_array = img_array[:, :, 0]
    >>> green_array = img_array[:, :, 1]
    >>> blue_array = img_array[:, :, 2]

**Operations on an axis**

It is possible to use methods from linear algebra to approximate an existing set
of data. Here, we will use the `SVD (Singular Value Decomposition)
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singular_value_decomposition>`_ to try to rebuild an
image that uses less singular value information than the original one, while still
retaining some of its features.

.. note::

    We will use NumPy's linear algebra module, `numpy.linalg`, to
    perform the operations in this tutorial. Most of the linear algebra
    functions in this module can also be found in `scipy.linalg`, and
    users are encouraged to use the `scipy` module for real-world
    applications. However, it is currently not possible to apply linear
    algebra operations to n-dimensional arrays using the `scipy.linalg`
    module. For more information on this, check the
    `scipy.linalg Reference

>     <https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/tutorial/linalg.html>`_.

Reviewer 3: This could become
```
:doc:`tutorial/linalg`
```
although as I said elsewhere, that is a bit too generic

Reviewer 2: If you use intersphinx format v2, I think this can be spelt ``:doc:`<scipy:tutorial/linalg>```

Reviewer 3: that works - thanks. I must have missed the documentation for that, where did you find it? The [intersphinx documentation](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/quickstart.html#intersphinx) doesn't mention that you can use that format.

Reviewer 2: That's not the full documentation, [this is](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/intersphinx.html#confval-intersphinx_mapping)

> The unique identifier can be used to prefix cross-reference targets, so that it is clear which intersphinx set the target belongs to. A link like `` :ref:`comparison manual <python:comparisons>` `` will link to the label “comparisons” in the doc set “python”, if it exists.

Author: Thanks!

::

    >>> approx_img.shape
    (3, 768, 1024)

which is not the right shape for showing the image. Finally, reordering the
axes back to our original shape of ``(768, 1024, 3)``, we can see our approximation::

    >>> plt.imshow(np.transpose(approx_img, (1, 2, 0)))

.. plot:: user/plot_final.py
    :align: center
    :include-source: 0
    
Even though the image is not as sharp, using a small number of ``k`` singular
values (compared to the original set of 768 values), we can recover many of the
distinguishing features from this image.

**Final words**

Of course, this is not the best method to *approximate* an image.
However, there is, in fact, a result in linear algebra that says that the
approximation we built above is the best we can get to the original matrix in
terms of the norm of the difference. For more information, see *G. H. Golub and
C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations, Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1985*.

**Further reading**

-  `Python tutorial <https://docs.python.org/tutorial/>`__
-  :ref:`reference`
-  `SciPy Tutorial <https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/tutorial/index.html>`__
-  `SciPy Lecture Notes <https://scipy-lectures.org>`__

> -  A `matlab, R, IDL, NumPy/SciPy dictionary <http://mathesaurus.sf.net/>`__

Reviewer 3: The first three could become (scipy lecture notes' ref is `index`, that seems too generic to be useful)
```
- :ref:`Python Tutorial <tutorial-index>`
- :ref:`reference`
- :ref:`SciPy Tutorial <tutorial/index>` 
```

Author: I did the same as with the links above. Thanks!

   the ``scikit-image`` documentation.

Now, ``img`` is a NumPy array, as we can see when using the ``type`` function::

    >>> type(img)
    numpy.ndarray

We can see the image using the `matplotlib.pyplot.imshow` function::

    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    >>> plt.imshow(img)

.. plot:: user/plot_face.py
    :align: center
    :include-source: 0

.. note::

   If you are executing the commands above in the IPython shell, it might be
   necessary to use the command ``plt.show()`` to show the image window. 
		     
**Shape, axis and array properties**

Note that, in linear algebra, the dimension of a vector refers to the number of
entries in an array. In NumPy, it instead defines the number of axes. For
example, a 1D array is a vector such as ``[1, 2, 3]``, a 2D array is a matrix,
and so forth.

First, let's check for the shape of the data in our array. Since this image is
two-dimensional (the pixels in the image form a rectangle), we might expect a
two-dimensional array to represent it (a matrix). However, using the ``shape``
property of this NumPy array gives us a different result::

    >>> img.shape
    (768, 1024, 3)

> The output is a `tuple` with three elements, which means that this is a

Reviewer 3: `tuple` does not render as a link. You probably want 
```
:ref:`tuple <tut-tuples>`
```
which goes to [here](https://docs.python.org/dev/tutorial/datastructures.html#tut-tuples)

Reviewer 2: `python:tut-tuples` would be clearer.

Author: I was actually thinking of emphasis for those, but I'll add the links to make it clearer. Thanks!

works, the *first index in the 3rd axis* is the red pixel data for our image. We
can access this by using the syntax

::

    >>> img[:, :, 0]
    array([[121, 138, 153, ..., 119, 131, 139],
           [ 89, 110, 130, ..., 118, 134, 146],
           [ 73,  94, 115, ..., 117, 133, 144],
           ...,
           [ 87,  94, 107, ..., 120, 119, 119],
           [ 85,  95, 112, ..., 121, 120, 120],
           [ 85,  97, 111, ..., 120, 119, 118]], dtype=uint8)

From the output above, we can see that every value in ``img[:,:,0]`` is an
integer value between 0 and 255, representing the level of red in each
corresponding image pixel (keep in mind that this might be different if you
use your own image instead of `scipy.misc.face`).

As expected, this is a 768x1024 matrix::

    >>> img[:, :, 0].shape
    (768, 1024)

Since we are going to perform linear algebra operations on this data, it might
be more interesting to have real numbers between 0 and 1 in each entry of the
matrices to represent the RGB values. We can do that by setting

    >>> img_array = img / 255

This operation, dividing an array by a scalar, works because of NumPy's

> `broadcasting` rules (see :ref:`array-broadcasting-in-numpy`). (Note that in

Reviewer 3: Maybe better as 
```
:ref:`broadcasting rules <array-broadcasting-in-numpy>`
```

an image that uses less singular value information than the original one, while
still retaining some of its features.

.. note::

    We will use NumPy's linear algebra module, `numpy.linalg`, to
    perform the operations in this tutorial. Most of the linear algebra
    functions in this module can also be found in `scipy.linalg`, and
    users are encouraged to use the `scipy` module for real-world
    applications. However, it is currently not possible to apply linear
    algebra operations to n-dimensional arrays using the `scipy.linalg`
    module. For more information on this, check the
    :doc:`scipy.linalg Reference<scipy:tutorial/linalg>`.

To proceed, import the linear algebra submodule from NumPy::

    >>> from numpy import linalg

In order to extract information from a given matrix, we can use the SVD to obtain
3 arrays which can be multiplied to obtain the original matrix. From the theory
of linear algebra, given a matrix :math:`A`, the following product can be
computed:

.. math::

   U \Sigma V^T = A

where :math:`U` and :math:`V^T` are square and :math:`\Sigma` is the same size
as :math:`A`. :math:`\Sigma` is a diagonal matrix and contains the

> `singular values` of :math:`A`, organized from largest to smallest. These values

Reviewer 3: double quotes on `singular values`, or did you have a particular link in mind?

.. note::

   If you prefer, you can use your own image as you work through this tutorial. In order to transform your image into a NumPy array that can be manipulated, you can use the ``imread`` function from the `matplotlib.pyplot` submodule. Alternatively, you can use the :func:`imageio.imread` function from the ``imageio`` library. Be aware that if you use your own image, you'll likely need to adapt the steps below. For more information on how images are treated when converted to NumPy arrays, see :std:doc:`user_guide/numpy_images` from the ``scikit-image`` documentation.

> 

Reviewer 3: line length a bit over 80

Author: Done, sorry.
